If your body still looks puffy, bloated, and soft even though you eat healthy, work out, walk, and do everything right, this might be the missing piece. I'm going to show you the hidden reasons why your healthy habits might be making you look more inflamed, not leaner, and how I finally fixed it. And it took me over 10 years to figure this out. I had the weirdest symptoms. Random gas and bloating after meals, stomach cramps so hard that my face turned red. I thought I was intolerant to everything and nothing because every time different things triggered my symptoms. Maybe it was the gluten, maybe lactose or potato or raw veggies or else. None of it was consistent enough to make it make sense. And the weirdest symptom wasn't even the bloating or my face turning red. It was that I suddenly developed eczema under my eye and in the corner of my mouth, even though I had never had eczema in my life before. And it didn't go away no matter what I tried. And so eventually to get help I went to dermatologist. I got diagnosed with dermatitis and I got prescribed antibiotics for 4 weeks with potential extension for another four weeks in case the symptoms will return which was very likely according to the dermatologist. I was not convinced because there is this very interesting thing that I find so fascinating that this dermatologist didn't even mention about is that most of the skin issues are linked to gut health. So, I came home, sat behind my laptop, and put my let's figure this out mode on and started digging. What I found completely changed how I understood my body, and it connected everything. But here's the part that will probably surprise you the most. What I found didn't only explain the eczema and the other random symptoms, but also why the healthiest foods that I ate every day made my bloating and puffiness worse. So, what I found is something called histamine intolerance, and your healthiest habits are probably making it worse. So, in today's video, I'll cover what histamine intolerance is, what causes it, how to identify if you have it, and how to fix it. Because if you've been doing everything right without results, this video might be the explanation you've been waiting for. And let me start with explaining what's actually happening. Histamine is a natural compound found in foods and also produced by your body. Normally, your body breaks it down with an enzyme called DAO DO. And histamine intolerance happens when there is too much histamine in your system for your body to break it down fast enough. The reasons why this happens is because you're either producing too much of it, you're eating too much of it, or your enzyme, your DO enzyme is not working properly enough. And the result looks like inflammation because in simplicity it is inflammation because histamine acts as a inflammatory agent causing fluid in your tissues. It looks like puffiness, soft body composition, bloating, and water retention, which doesn't change no matter how hard you train or diet, which makes it feel like nothing is working. However, it's important to mention that histamine intolerance is not a food allergy. Look at histamine tolerance more like a bucket. You have a bucket which can either be empty, half full, full or overflowing. And histamine intolerance works exactly like this. When your bucket is full of histamine and it's overflowing, it causes symptoms. And when your histamine bucket is empty, you may experience no symptoms at all. This is exactly why it can feel so confusing and it feels like you're allergic to everything and nothing at the same time. One day you eat something and you have no symptoms. Everything is totally fine. And the next day you eat the same thing and you get symptoms. Histamine intolerance is like being in a toxic relationship. One day it's good, the next day it isn't. But even though histamine intolerance can be so confusing, there are still ways to identify if you really have it or not. And there are three different ways you can do this. First is going through the symptoms. Therefore, I'm going to give you a list of symptoms that are usually associated with histamine intolerance so you can identify whether you have it or not. I'm going to add the symptoms list here on the screen. As you see, many of these look like food sensitivities. That's exactly the reason why histamine intolerance can be missed entirely because these symptoms look like completely separate problems. Irritable bowel, anxiety, allergy, hormonal imbalances. And so you might get treated for these different symptoms individually without ever finding what's actually connecting them like I had with the eczema. I got diagnosed with dermatitis, got treated for dermatitis. whereas there was actually deeper underlying issue. Another way to test if your symptoms are caused by histamine intolerance or something else is to do a four-week elimination diet. If during those four weeks of elimination diet your symptoms go away, it most likely is a histamine intolerance. And third way to identify whether you have histamine intolerance or not is to take a test. though there are not many who offer that. But of course, testing doesn't replace working with a doctor or a qualified practitioner. But it definitely might be a helpful starting point in understanding what's happening in your body. I mean, for a long time, I tried to understand what was going on in my body and what was causing all my illogical symptoms. For example, after drinking red wine, I get red rash on my hands only here. And it's like red rash that is dry and it hurts. or if I eat avocado or banana, I get insane stomach cramps accompanied with red face. What is even weirder is that I didn't had it my entire life. When I was a kid, I could eat as many bananas or avocados as I pleased. So, this was not something I was born with. It developed. And the reason I developed histamine intolerance is directly connected to the things I used to do in the name of fitness. Which brings me to the most important part of this video. What causes histamine intolerance? There are three main reasons that cause histamine intolerance. And this part is important because once you understand what causes it, you also understand how to treat it. So you can finally get that tone physique and get rid of those weird symptoms that you might be experiencing. Cause number one, overtraining and undereating. I used to train really hard because I really wanted to have my dream body. At my best, which was really at my worst, I would be running for tens of kilometers on a fastest stomach in the mornings. In the evenings, I would bike 7 kilometers to the gym, have 2-hour gym session, and then bike back home. And while I was biking back home, I remember sitting on that bike and thinking to myself, let's just squeeze the last bit out of me today. Make this body burn fat finally. And on top of that, I constantly followed some low calorie diet. I calculated the calories of cucumbers and carrots, and this is why I developed histamine tolerance. What I failed to understand is that this type of training doesn't make you fit, but it does give you a bunch of health problems. Here is the thing. That level of training and especially on top of eating very little causes histamine intolerance because intense exercise releases histamine into your body as a normal inflammatory response which is fine in normal circumstances. But it becomes problematic when you train hard without proper recovery. Because without proper recovery, histamine never gets fully cleared between sessions. Unfortunately, especially in women, this can be so much more common than many women even realize because we have totally internalized this message to move more and eat less because we think that gets us results. I had this too. I thought resting is the thing that makes you fat and recovery is for the But now with years, I've understood I had to understand my body put me to understand is that rest and recovery is the most crucial part of your whole fitness routine. Which brings me to the next cause. You know, Finland is either dark or someone is making renovation, meaning it's either winter or it's summer. And so, amongst many more problems that overtraining and undereating can cause, one more thing that is important specifically for histamine intolerance is how overtraining and undereating damages the gut lining. Which brings me to the second reason that causes histamine intolerance or gut health. Here's the thing. The gut health determines how well your body clears out histamine. The Dowo enzyme is produced in your gut lining and a damaged gut naturally produces less dowo enzyme which reduces your body's ability to break down histamine which leads to faster histamine accumulation. So in very simple words, a damaged gut makes you more prone to histamine intolerance which brings me to the third reason that causes histamine intolerance. Let's get back to my eczema story. Before the eczema appeared on my face, I had been under stress for a significant amount of time. I was going through some stressful period. I had panic attacks, anxiety attacks, la. And then there was one event that I think was the tipping point for my stress. Right after that event, a tiny tiny tiny spot appeared under my eye, which later grew into a full-blown eczema going all the way to my corner of my mouth. So the third reason that causes histamine intolerance is stress. But stress might not be the trigger for developing histamine intolerance, but rather a contributor. So once you have histamine intolerance, it definitely makes your bucket overflow because cortisol suppresses the function of dowo ensum. And this exactly explains why histamine tolerance can be so seasonal or situational. Which brings me to the everyday healthy foods that you might be eating that are making histamine intolerance worse. This is the part that will probably surprise you the most, but this is important because there are certain foods that naturally contain a lot of histamine in them. But if you have histamine intolerance and you are in the stage where your bucket is overflowing, the number one thing you need to do in order to get rid of those symptoms is cut out all the foods that contain histamine. That is exactly what I did when I was fighting eczema on my face. I went on a four-week elimination diet where I eliminated all the foods that contain histamine in them. I'm going to tell you, it was not a nice diet to be on. I basically fed myself only with air. No, just joking. But it is a pretty restrictive diet. I followed that for 4 weeks and my eczema was gone. But here's what you should know when it comes to histamine-free diet. There are three different groups of foods that are problematic for someone with a histamine tolerance. One, foods that are high in histamine to foods that trigger histamine release in your body. And three, foods that block DAO. And based on these three different groups, I'm going to add a comprehensive list of foods that you should avoid if you have histamine intolerance bucket overflow. I'll add it here on the screen. As you can see, many of them are really healthy. These are foods that you might be eating specifically for your health because they're considered anti-inflammatory and good for your gut health. And for most women, they genuinely are healthy. But if you are in a flare up stage, eating these specific foods can make your symptoms feel worse. This is exactly why the very things the very foods that you're eating to heal your gut might be making your inflammation worse when your histamine bucket is overflowing. And if you would like to follow a four-week diet plan that focuses on balancing histamine in your body, I've made a four-week histamine-free diet plan for you, which you can find in the pin comments below. To be clear, these foods are not bad and that you should forever cut them out of your diet and never eat them. They are healthy foods, really healthy foods. And for a normal person without histamine tolerance, keep eating them. Really, don't go ahead and cut them out of your diet. When I had the eczema on my face, I could not have anything where was Vinegar. I could not have anything with yeast. So, it was really complicated diet to follow and especially plan everything out. But I figured it out and I stickked with it and after 4 weeks it was gone. Which brings me to what actually helps to overcome histamine intolerance. What should you exactly do? But before we get into it, comment bucket below if this video resonated with you. I just want to know. I'm generally curious how many of you might actually also have this. And also, if you learned even one new thing today, give this video a thumbs up and consider subscribing to my channel, too. Thank you so much for doing that. And now let's get into the steps. Step one, which we've been covering throughout this video already slightly all the time, is a low histamine period. Not permanently, but just enough to let the histamine bucket empty. So, as I already mentioned in this video, when I got the eczema, I went on an elimination diet for 4 weeks. And so, basically, it's the same for you, too. Whenever something triggers your symptoms, go on a elimination diet until the symptoms go away. And sometimes, yes, you might need even more than four weeks. But again, this is not about forever restriction. It's about healing. Mhm. And in case you really want to follow a readymade histamine-free meal plan, you can get it from the pinned comment below. Step number two, repair the gut lining. Reduce the fermented foods for a while even though they're healthy. Instead, focus on eating enough, reducing stress, and remove overtraining, which all support gut health and also the DAO production. Step three, try DAO supplements. They do exist and can help when you are in the bucket overflow stage and need to eat something outside your control. for example, a dinner out, travel, birthday. I have personally never tried it, but it can work for people who really just can't control always what they're eating. The way they work is simply by adding the enzyme that your gut is not producing enough. Step four, making sure you have enough of vitamin B6, vitamin C, and copper because they all support DAO enzyme production naturally. Step five, reduce the intensity of your workouts. Switch to walking or other low inensity workouts for 2 to 4 weeks to let your histamine bucket to drain. I know many of you love running. I get so many DMs from you that you'll just love running and the hardest part for you is to let go of running. And I get you cuz I've been there too. I love running myself a lot super much. But it's just what you have to do if you want to get rid of the inflammation in your body. You don't have to do it forever, just for a period of time until your body is in a better state health-wise. Step six, and this is really the most important step thing is system intolerance is very individual and it's individual how much you can take. Therefore, the best thing you can do for yourself if you have histam intolerance is develop a connection with your body. Learning to spot the early signs and your sweet spot so to say. Thing is for me the hardest part wasn't to uh follow some diet or whatever else. It was to slow down and accept that this is how my body works. Learning to accept that sometimes it's too much for my body and also acting on that. Slowing down when needed. And to connect this specifically with histamine intolerance, sometimes you'll have more stressful periods in your life and you just cannot control that or there is some other unexplained reason why your histamine bucket is going to overflow. But if you learn to spot the early signs before the symptoms go completely out of hand, that is the best skill you can have if you're someone with histamine tolerance. I'm sorry to say this, but you just kind of have to learn to live with it. However, when it comes to that soft, puffy, bloated body composition that just won't change no matter what you try, there are five more reasons for that which are not often discussed, but I talk about them in this video. So, watch it next.